This docment describes the module API of mtxircd at the time of the merge back 
upstream to txircd.  Please modify or remove this document as it becomes 
inaccurate.

Modules in txircd are python files in the modules directory containing at least 
a Spawner class and typically at least one other class.  Modules implementing 
commands or modes must include another class extending Command or Mode from 
txircd.modbase.

The Spawner class simply extends object, but there are five methods called by 
the core:

__init__: The constructor is passed a reference to the server's IRCD instance.  
It is highly recommended that you keep this.

spawn: [REQUIRED] Returns a dictionary describing what the module supports.  
More information is below.

cleanup: [REQUIRED] Cleans up any handles left to it in the core.

data_serialize: [OPTIONAL] Returns any data to be kept for the module again as 
a list of two dictionaries.  The first dictionary should contain only basic 
Python types suitable for writing to a yaml file.  This dictionary is written 
to disk in a database file (data.yaml) and kept across multiple sessions.  The 
second dictionary can contain whatever and is only kept for the purposes of 
maintaining data across reloads.  If a key is specified in both dictionaries, 
the one in the persistent (first) dictionary takes priority.

data_unserialize: [OPTIONAL] Is passed a dictionary of data serialized by the 
module and restores the data to the proper places in the module.


SPAWN METHOD RETURN VALUE
The Spawner.spawn method returns a dictionary containing up to three other 
dictionaries under the keys "commands", "modes", and "actions".

The commands dictionary maps commands (as keys) to the classes implementing 
them.  As a simple example,
"commands": {
	"RESTART": RestartCommand()
}
where RestartCommand is a class in the module that extends 
txircd.modbase.Command and contains the code that should trigger when the 
command RESTART is issued by a client.

The modes dictionary maps a mode identifier (key) to a class implementing that 
mode.  Mode identifiers are 3-character strings as follows:
The first character is either a 'c', indicating a channel mode, or a 'u', 
indicating a user mode.
The second character indicates the type of mode it is:
'l' => list mode
'u' => parameter mode (with parameter required on unset)
'p' => parameter mode (with no parameter on unset)
'n' => normal mode/boolean mode
's' => status mode (channel modes only)
The third character is the mode letter of the mode being implemented.

Status modes extend the mode identifier syntax:
The fourth character is the prefix symbol to be assigned to the mode (e.g. '@' 
for +o).
All characters starting with the fifth are read in as a number indicating the 
mode's relative rank level, used to put status modes in order.  Levels used by 
the RFC modes are 100 for +o and 10 for +v.  Higher numbers give a higher 
ranking in the channel, and lower numbers give a lower ranking.

The actions dictionary maps some actions (key) to lists of one or more 
functions to handle that action.  Actions handled by default in the core are as 
follows:
"connect": This action is called when a connection is established with a user.  
It is passed that user's new user object.
"register": This action is called when a user completes registration.  This 
action is most useful for checking user data on registration for the purpose of 
allowing or denying a connection.  It is passed that user's user object and 
returns either True to indicate that registration is fine and the user should be 
allowed to finish connecting or False to disconnect the user.
"welcome": This action is called after registration is fully processed and the 
user receives the welcome messages after registration.
"join": This action is called when a user has just joined a channel.  It is 
called right after the IRCd finishes processing the channel join.  It is passed 
the user object of the user who just joined and the channel object of the 
channel that was joined.
"joinmessage": This action is called during the channel join processing.  It is 
useful for modifying or hiding the channel join notice for some or all users.  
It is passed the channel object for the channel being joined, the user object 
for the joining user, and a list of users who were to see the normal join 
message, and it returns the same or a modified list of users who are still to 
see the normal join message from the IRCd.
"nick": This action is called when a user changes nicks.  It is passed the user 
object that just changed nicks updated with the new nickname, and a string of 
the old nickname.
"quit": This action is called when a user disconnects.  It is passed the user 
object and the quit reason.  This function is called immediately after quit 
processing, so messages cannot be sent to the user this way.
"topic": This action is called when the topic changes in a channel.  It is 
passed a channel object of the channel whose topic is being changed still with 
the old topic, the new topic, and the new topic setter.
"nameslistentry": This action is called as part of processing the NAMES output 
to allow functions to modify how nicknames appear in the output.  It receives a 
user object of the user requesting NAMES, channel object of the channel in which 
NAMES is being requested, a user object of the user being listed, and a string 
representation of how the user will be shown in output.  The function returns a 
new representation (or the same one if there's nothing to do).
"chancreate": This action is called when a channel is created.  It is passed a 
channel object of the channel being created.
"chandestroy": This action is called when a channel is being destroyed.  It is 
passed a channel object of the channel being destroyed.
"commandextra": This action is called, depending on the command, either after 
processing of the command has finished, or at some point during command 
processing, and can be used to do something extra or, in some cases, affect the 
command's behavior.  The function receives the command that was used and either 
the command's data dictionary or a dictionary of data generated by the command 
function (if called during processing).
"commandunknown": This action is called when an unknown command is received 
from the client.  It may return True to suppress the normal 421 UNKNOWN COMMAND 
output.
"commandpermission": This action is called as a normal part of command 
processing to determine whether a user may execute a command.  It is called 
after a command's processParams function completes and receives the command 
being processed and the resulting data dictionary.  It returns a new data 
dictionary, which may be empty to indicate that the IRCd should stop processing 
the command.  The calling user is typically placed in the data dictionary as 
data["user"].
"metadataupdate": This action is called whenever a user's or a channel's 
metadata is updated or deleted.  It receives the user or channel object in 
which the metadata was updated, the namespace and key of the changed metadata, 
and the old and new value.  onMetadata(target, namespace, key, oldValue, value)
"recvdata": This action is called when data is received from a client.  It 
receives the user object and the line that was received.
"senddata": This action is called when data is sent to a client.  It receives 
the user object and the line that was sent.

Modules may also implement their own actions.  Actions returned with keys that 
are not in this list will be added under the new action given.

The "server" dictionary is used if your module is to respond to certain 
ModuleMessage commands.  It is a map of the command type to a single function 
pointer.

The "common" value is either True or False and determines whether the module 
must be loaded on all servers to function.  If two servers to not share the 
same set of common modules, they will refuse to link.


THE COMMAND CLASS
The Command class has three important methods.  Most Command implementations 
will implement two of these.

processParams(self, user, params): This method is the first method called when 
processing starts.  It processes the parameters (a list of the function's 
parameters split into IRC tokens) into a dictionary of information (or an empty 
dictionary to abort processing of the command).  It is recommended that the 
calling user be inserted into returned useful dictionaries under the "user" 
key.  Typically this function will perform basic checking of permissions (for 
example, oper-only modes will check that the user is an oper in this function) 
and parameters.  If the command is good to trigger, it will return a dictionary 
with data indicating to continue.

If the dictionary returned by processParams contains data, the 
commandpermission action is called with the command and returned data 
dictionary.  The commandpermission action functions may modify the data or 
abort the command (although they are expected not to delete important keys 
unless aborting).

onUse(self, user, data): This method is called once commandpermission is 
complete and receives again the object of the calling user and the final data 
dictionary.  This function does the actual carrying out of what the command 
does.

updateActivity(self, user): This method is not typically redefined.  The 
default implementation is to update the user's last activity time to the time 
in which the command was issued.  It can be redefined to do nothing (pass) to 
suppress this updating.


THE MODE CLASS
The Mode class has a five methods called by the core.  These are not all 
typically useful at once for one mode, but they are all available.

checkSet(self, user, target, param): Checks whether the mode can be set.  Gets 
the calling user (user), the target (either the user or channel object on which 
the mode is being set, depending on whether the mode is a user or channel 
mode), and the parameter given for the mode, if applicable (otherwise None).  
This method will generally check to make sure the given parameter is valid.  It 
returns a two-item list; the first item is a boolean value which can be True 
(indicating all is OK) or False (denying the mode change).  The second value is 
the new parameter (None is acceptable for parameterless modes).

checkUnset(self, user, target, param): Works as checkSet, but is called to 
check that the mode with the given parameter (or None) can be unset on the 
target.  Has the same return value.

showParam(self, user, target, param): This function is called for modes with 
parameters when the parameter needs to be shown to a user.  It receives the 
current parameter of the mode as set on target.  This function returns a string 
being how the parameter should appear to the user.
This function is called for list modes when the mode list is requested.  It 
outputs the list for the mode.  There is no required return value.

checkPermission(self, user, cmd, data): This function is called...
- for channel modes, when "targetchan" is a key in the function's data
- for user modes, when a command is used
It is used similarly to the "commandpermission" action.  The "targetchan" key 
can point to a single channel or a list, depending on the command.

namesListEntry(self, recipient, channel, user, representation): This function 
is called when NAMES output must be given for a channel and works similarly to 
the "nameslistentry" action as described above.